# radiator 1.1.3 2020-01-21

* `detect_microsatellites`: new radiator function that detect microsatellites using 
GMATA.


# radiator 1.1.0 2019-05-31

* 2 new output formats: `genepopedit` and `rubias`
* 1 new detect function: `detect_paralogs` that copy the method described in
McKinney et al. 2017. This function is the logical step to make available for users
after `detect_mixed_genomes`, `filter_hwe` and `sexy_markers`.
* `sexy_markers`: couple of bug fixed. More testing with the different genomic
format.

# radiator 1.0.0 2019-05-01

* There is still documentation and vignette to fix, but this is 
the release that will be submitted to CRAN
* Major `SeqArray` and `GDS` integration
* Imputation module was removed from `radiator` and now lives exclusively in package `grur`
* `filter_dart` is deprecated. Please use `filter_rad`, the ONE function to rule them all;)
* Worked on travis
* pkgdown website
* vignettes
* better function doc

# radiator 0.0.21 2018-11-14

* `snp.ld`: using missing data now works by chromosome/scaffold.


# radiator 0.0.20 2018-11-12

* `tidy_vcf`, `tidy_genomic_data` and `genomic_converter`: works better with ipyrad vcf's


# radiator 0.0.19 2018-11-07

* `tidy_vcf`, `tidy_genomic_data` and `genomic_converter`: works better with freebayes and stacks vcf


# radiator 0.0.18 2018-10-23

* `tidy_vcf`, `tidy_genomic_data` and `genomic_converter`: work without strata/pop grouping
* `snp_ld`: new argument `ld.threshold` for long.distance linkage disequilibrium.
* `write_vcf`: will now output ID as LOCUS_COL or LOCUS_(POS-1) if COL info is not provided.

# radiator 0.0.17 2018-10-04

* `tidy_vcf`, `tidy_genomic_data` and `genomic_converter`: way faster with huge VCF
* `tidy_vcf` and `write_seqarray`: work better with vcf generated by Stacks
* `write_ldna`: new function that generates a LDna input file from a tidy data frame.

# radiator 0.0.16 2018-09-04

* `tidy_vcf`, `tidy_genomic_data` and `genomic_converter`: way faster with huge VCF
* `write_fineradstructure`: fix bug when data was from DArT


# radiator 0.0.15 2018-08-17

* `genomic_converter`, `tidy_genomic_data`: bug fix when individuals are integers
* `fis_summary`: arguments updated


# radiator 0.0.14 2018-08-04

* `filter_dart` and `filter_rad`: can now opt out of HWE filtering. 
* `filter_hwe`: user can opt to see figures but skip filtering



# radiator 0.0.13 2018-07-09

* working to make radiator work correctly with ggplot2 v.3.0.0
* radiator ready for R 3.5.1 "Feather Spray" released on 2018/07/05


# radiator 0.0.12 2018-06-21

* transferred `write_gsi_sim` from assigner to radiator
* 2 `write` functions: `write_snprelate` and `write_seqarray`


# radiator 0.0.11 2018-04-26

* when individuals in strata file/object and data don't match, an error is generated
* to reduce `radiator` dependencies, several packages were moved in the **Suggests** field.
* `filter_dart`: lots of new stuff. More appropriate filter arguments:
    * `filter.coverage` is deprecated in favour of: filter.markers.coverage
    * `filter.ind.missing.geno` is deprecated in favour of: `filter.markers.missing`
    * `erase.genotypes`: new argument tailored to handle coverage for DArT counts data.
    * `filter.individuals.missing`: allows to blacklist sample early in the filtering
    pipeline.


# radiator 0.0.10 2018-03-06

* New output file: stockr 
  This output file format enables to run the data in the stockR package from Scott Fisher at CSIRO in Hobart.


# radiator 0.0.9 2018-03-01

* New output file: related 
  This output file format enables to run the data in the related R package, which is
  essantially the R version of *COANCESTRY* fortran program developed by Jinliang Wang.


# radiator 0.0.8 2018-02-08

* New output file: fineRADstructure

# radiator 0.0.7 2018-02-06

* Better VCF parsing
* `radiator` is ready for stacks v.2 beta8
* starting to re-introduce `data.table` to increase speed during melting or casting data frames

# radiator 0.0.6 2017-10-02

* `tidy_genomic_data` and `genomic_converter`: bug fix and improvements.
* `write_snprelate` and it's associated output from `genomic_converter` is no longer
available because of difficulties students are having in installing the package,
it's dependencies and/or using the output. The code remains available [here](https://www.dropbox.com/s/7xujizkvpi0ddac/write_snprelate.R?dl=0),
without support.
* `radiator::snp.ld`: the module inside `tidy_genomic_data` and `genomic_converter`
to minimize short linkage disequilibrium as a new option `snp.ld = "middle"`. 
For locus with > 2 SNPs/read the option allows to select at random one SNP between 
the first and the last SNP on the read. If the locus as <= 2 SNPs on the read,
the first one is selected. Note that for that last option, the numbers are reported.
Thanks to Ido Bar for the idea.


# radiator 0.0.5 2017-09-20

* `tidy_dart` and `filter_dart`: 
    * big overhaul.
    * importing 1 and 2 row genotypes (called sometimes binary format) is easier
    and no longer require to prep the DArT file
    (the function parse DArT data with `*` at the beginning of certain lines).
    * filtering is easier and now interactive for those who want.
    * plots are generated automatically. 
* `tidy_genomic_data` and `genomic_converter` can now accept DArT data directly.
* several typos where fix. Thanks to @IdoBar for this.

# radiator 0.0.4 2017-09-07

* new function: `run_bayescan` to run *BayeScan* ... with *radiator*
* new separate `write` functions also included in `genomic_converter`: `write_bayescan`, `write_pcadapt` and `write_hzar`.

# radiator 0.0.3 2017-07-18

* small mod
* writting in specific folder
* writting specific plot

# radiator 0.0.2 2017-07-15

* Work on different functions to prep for official package launch


# radiator 0.0.1 2017-06-18

* First commit
